Discovery article (#459)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/articles/discovery-search.md

small_preview_image: /articles_data/discovery-search/icon.svg # This image will be used in the list of articles at the footer, should be 40x40px
preview_dir: /articles_data/discovery-search/preview # This directory contains images that will be used in the article preview. They can be generated from one image. Read more below. Required.
weight: -100 # This is the order of the article in the list of articles at the footer. The lower the number, the higher the article will be in the list.
author: Luis Cossío # Author of the article. Required.
author_link: https://coszio.github.io # Link to the author's page. Required.
date: 2023-12-11T13:00:00+03:00 # Date of the article. Required.
draft: false # If true, the article will not be published
keywords: # Keywords for SEO
  - why use a vector database
  - specialty
  - search
  - discovery
  - state of the art
  - vector search
---

When Christopher Columbus and his crew sailed to cross the Atlantic Ocean, they were not looking for America. They were looking for a new route to India, and they were convinced that the Earth was round. They didn't know anything about America, but since they were going west, they stumbled upon it.

> They couldn't reach their _target_, because the the geography didn't let them, but once they realized it wasn't India, they claimed it a new "discovery" for their crown. If we consider that sailors need bodies of water to sail, then we can establish a _context_ which is positive in the water, and negative on land. Once the sailor's search was stopped by the land, they could not go any further, and a new route was found. Let's keep this concepts of _target_ and _context_ in mind as we explore the new functionality of Qdrant: __Discovery search__.

Reviewer: I like the analogy here and it really helps to to get into the topic. I'd just remove this `bodies of`phrase - confuses me. it's just about water and land, right?

![Context vs recommendation search](/articles_data/discovery-search/context-vs-recommendation.png)

__Context search__ solves this by de-focusing the search around a single point. Instead, it selects points randomly from within a zone in the vector space. This search is the most influenced by _triplet loss_, as the score can be thought of as _"how much a point is closer to a negative than a positive vector?"_. If it is closer to the positive one, then its score will be zero, same as any other point within the same zone. But if it is on the negative side, it will be assigned a more and more negative score the further it gets.

![Context search visualization](/articles_data/discovery-search/context-search.png)

Creating complex tastes in a high-dimensional space becomes easier, since you can just add more context pairs to the search. So, in theory, you should be able to constrain the space enough so you select points from a per-search "category" created just from the context in the input.

![A more complex context search](/articles_data/discovery-search/complex-context-search.png)

> This way you can give refeshing recommendations, while still being in control by providing positive and negative feedback.

Reviewer: I found that section quite well explained - was easy to follow for me. however you really got me with the kicker in the front - with the music recommendation. having a real example would be so cool :)

---
title: "Discovery needs context" #required
short_description: Discover points by constraining the space
description: Qdrant released a new functionality that lets you constrain the space in which a search is performed, relying only pure vectors #required
social_preview_image: /articles_data/discovery-search/social_preview.jpg # This image will be used in social media previews, should be 1200x630px. Required.
small_preview_image: /articles_data/discovery-search/icon.svg # This image will be used in the list of articles at the footer, should be 40x40px
preview_dir: /articles_data/discovery-search/preview # This directory contains images that will be used in the article preview. They can be generated from one image. Read more below. Required.
weight: -100 # This is the order of the article in the list of articles at the footer. The lower the number, the higher the article will be in the list.
author: Luis Cossío # Author of the article. Required.
author_link: https://coszio.github.io # Link to the author's page. Required.

> date: 2023-12-11T13:00:00+03:00 # Date of the article. Required.

Reviewer 2: I presume you'll want to change the date

Author: Yes, as soon as I know the publication date 😄

small_preview_image: /articles_data/discovery-search/icon.svg # This image will be used in the list of articles at the footer, should be 40x40px
preview_dir: /articles_data/discovery-search/preview # This directory contains images that will be used in the article preview. They can be generated from one image. Read more below. Required.
weight: -100 # This is the order of the article in the list of articles at the footer. The lower the number, the higher the article will be in the list.
author: Luis Cossío # Author of the article. Required.
author_link: https://coszio.github.io # Link to the author's page. Required.
date: 2023-12-11T13:00:00+03:00 # Date of the article. Required.
draft: false # If true, the article will not be published
keywords: # Keywords for SEO
  - why use a vector database
  - specialty
  - search
  - discovery
  - state of the art
  - vector search
---

When Christopher Columbus and his crew sailed to cross the Atlantic Ocean, they were not looking for America. They were looking for a new route to India, and they were convinced that the Earth was round. They didn't know anything about America, but since they were going west, they stumbled upon it.

> They couldn't reach their target, because the context of the geography didn't let them, but once they realized it wasn't India, they claimed it a new "discovery" for their crown. Let's keep this concepts of target and context in mind, as we explore the new functionality of Qdrant: __Discovery search__.

Reviewer 3: > They couldn’t reach their target, because the context of the geography didn’t let them.

I am not sure this analogy helps me understand the concept of `context` here.
What is the context of geography exactly?

Author: The idea is to give a notion as to why sometimes it is important for a search to be tied to a context. I see now that saying "context of geography" is ambiguous. Let me rephrase.

Author: Upgraded it, @agourlay, is it clearer now?

In version 1.7, Qdrant [released](/articles/qdrant-1.7.x/) this novel API that lets you constrain the space in which a search is performed, relying only on pure vectors. This is a powerful tool that lets you explore the vector space in a more controlled way. It can be used to find points that are not necessarily closest to the target, but are still relevant to the search.

One previous way to restrict the points that are available to the search is by filtering out the points we know for a fact are not relevant. This is really powerful because it allows us to craft complex filters that show only the points that satisfy their criteria deterministically. However, the data –or payload– associated to each point is arbitrary and does not tell us anything about their position in the vector space. In other words, it would create a _mask_ rather than a _boundary_ in the space.

> This is where the concept of __vector _context___ comes in. We define _context_ as a list of pairs, which in turn are made up of a positive and a negative vector. By adding a context, we can define boundaries within the vector space, to which the positive side will always be preferred over the negative side, effectively partitioning the space in which the search is performed. After the space is partitioned, we then need a _target_ to select the points that are closest to it.

Reviewer 3: The word `boundary` is a bit fuzzy for higher dimension space.
Is it like a hyperplane cutting orthogonal between the positive and negative vector?

Author: Exactly! I like the way you are saying it

![Discovery search visualization](/articles_data/discovery-search/discovery-search.png)

> When hearing about positive and negative vectors, one might be taken back to recommendation systems. However, now these positive and negative vectors have to be provided in the shape of a context. This is inspired from the machine-learning concept of _triplet loss_, where you have three vectors: an anchor, a positive, and a negative. But in this case, the anchor would be the vector you are searching for, and the positive and negative vectors are the ones that define the context.

Author: I've actually never used triplet-loss, would you elaborate?

## Discovery search

Let's talk about the first case: target with context.

To understand why this is useful, let's take a look at a real-world example: using a cross-modal embedder like [CLIP](https://openai.com/blog/clip/) to search for images, from text __and__ images.
CLIP is a neural network that can embed both images and text into the same vector space. This means that if you were to search for an image, you could do so by providing a text query, and vice versa. Now, take a glance at this image, and don't look at it again:

![Weird dragon](/articles_data/discovery-search/weird-dragon.png)

How would you look for it if you:

- Don't know the name
- Can't see it again
- Cannot do reverse image search.

A first strategy would be describing it with text, and then looking for similar images.

![Googling dragon with human heads](/articles_data/discovery-search/googling-weird-dragon.png)

Trial and error might work if you are clever enough to describe it well and get close enough on the selected image. If not, good luck getting out of the similarity bubble, even if you can select multiple images. Why is this hard?

> Turns out, cross modal encoders might not work how you expect them to. Images and text are embedded in the same space, but they are not necessarily close to each other. This means that we can create a mental model of the distribution as two separate planes, one for images and one for text.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Turns out, multimodal encoders might not work how you expect them to. Images and text are embedded in the same space, but they are not necessarily close to each other. This means that we can create a mental model of the distribution as two separate planes, one for images and one for text.
```

There are also cross-encoders so I thought it might be confusing.

> Turns out, cross modal encoders might not work how you expect them to. Images and text are embedded in the same space, but they are not necessarily close to each other. This means that we can create a mental model of the distribution as two separate planes, one for images and one for text.

Reviewer 4: Putting a link as a reference: https://twitter.com/metasemantic/status/1356406256802607112. There is also a pretty interesting visual.

Author: Nice!! I like that some people are already aware of this problem

![Cross-modal search with discovery](/articles_data/discovery-search/clip-discovery.png)

Discovery also lets us keep giving feedback to the search engine in the shape of more context pairs, so we can keep refining our search until we find what we are looking for.

Another intuitive example: imagine you're looking for a fish pizza, but pizza names can be confusing, so you can just type "pizza", and prefer a fish over meat. Discovery search will let you use these inputs to suggest a fish pizza... even if it's not called fish pizza!

![Simple discovery example](/articles_data/discovery-search/discovery-example-with-images.png)

## Context search

Now, second case: only context.

Ever been caught in the same recommendations on your favourite music streaming service? This may be caused by getting stuck in a similarity bubble. As user input gets more complex, diversity becomes scarse, and it becomes harder to force the system to recommend something different.

![Context vs recommendation search](/articles_data/discovery-search/context-vs-recommendation.png)

> __Context search__ solves this by de-focusing the search around a single point. Instead, it selects points randomly from within an zone in the vector space. This search is the most influenced by _triplet loss_, as the score can be thought of as _"how much a point is closer to a negative than a positive vector?"_. If it is closer to the positive one, then its score will be zero, same as any other point within the same zone. But if it is on the negative side, it will be assigned a more and more negative score the further it gets.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
__Context search__ solves this by de-focusing the search around a single point. Instead, it selects points randomly from within a zone in the vector space. This search is the most influenced by _triplet loss_, as the score can be thought of as _"how much a point is closer to a negative than a positive vector?"_. If it is closer to the positive one, then its score will be zero, same as any other point within the same zone. But if it is on the negative side, it will be assigned a more and more negative score the further it gets.
```
